- Name: PLUS (Path Layer UDP Substrate)

- Description: The PLUS working group's goal is to enable the deployment of new, encrypted transport protocols, while providing a transport-independent method to signal flow semantics under transport and application control. The approach from which the working group will start is a shim layer based on the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), which provides compatibility with existing middleboxes in the Internet as well as ubiquitous support in endpoints, and provides for userspace implementation. Note that this effort follows from the SPUD BoF in Dallas and the SPUD prototyping effort, and preparation for the BoF has taken place on the SPUD list.

- Agenda
  - Introduction (10 min)
      - Chairs
  - Overview of proposed approach (20 min)
      - Brian Trammell, Mirja Kuehlewind, Ted Hardie
  - Discussion of the potential for IETF work (30 min)
      - BoF attendees
  - Charter review (20 min)
      - Chairs
  - Charter Discussion (60 min)
      - BoF attendees

- Status: WG forming
- Responsible AD: Spencer Dawkins
- BoF proponents: Ted Hardie <ted.ietf@gmail.com>, Mirja Kuehlewind <mirja.kuehlewind@tik.ee.ethz.ch>, Brian Trammell <ietf@trammell.ch>
- BoF chairs: (TBD)
- Number of attendees: 150
- Length of session: 2.5 hours
- Conflicts:  TSVAREA, SAAG, TLS, RTCWEB, DISPATCH, MAPRG, TSVWG, ICCRG, TCPM, TCPINC, MPTCP, TAPS, LURK, UTA, TSV BoFs
- Links to the mailing list, draft charter if any, relevant Internet-Drafts, etc.
   - Tentative charter: 
        The PLUS working group's goal is to enable the deployment of new, encrypted
        transport protocols, while providing a transport-independent method to signal
        flow semantics under transport and application control. The approach from
        which the working group will start is a shim layer based on the User Datagram
        Protocol (UDP), which provides compatibility with existing middleboxes in the
        Internet as well as ubiquitous support in endpoints, and provides for
        userspace implementation.

        The current Internet protocol stack does not provide explicit, transport-
        independent signaling of flow characteristics to on-path network devices. This
        has led to the deployment of devices which perform implicit discovery of these
        characteristics, through inspection of protocol headers all they way up to the
        application layer, a practice made possible because these headers are sent in
        the clear. Inspection and modification of unencrypted protocol headers is a
        key cause of the ossification that makes it hard or impossible to deploy new
        protocols.

        In order to support more ubiquitous deployment of encryption, and the
        encryption of transport headers to allow deployment of new transport
        protocols, explicit signaling must be added to the stack, and it must be
        transport protocol independent. While IP would seem to be the natural home for
        this facility, both IPv4 and IPv6 options and extensions have deployment
        problems on their own, which makes it hard to include any additional
        information in these protocols. Additionally, a feedback channel that provides
        information from on-path devices back to endpoints and applications, e.g. for
        error handling, is essential for the deployment and success of an explicit
        cooperation approach.

        The PLUS working group will specify a new protocol as a Path Layer
        User Substrate (PLUS), to support experimental deployment of
        explicit cooperation between endpoints and devices on path, with the following goals:

        enable ubiquitous deployment of encrypted higher layer protocols
          by providing exposure of basic TCP-like semantics (e.g. SYN, FIN, 
          RST flags) to devices on path (e.g. NATs and firewalls).

        allow applications and transport protocols to explicitly provide
          limited information in cleartext to devices on path

        allow devices on path to provide feedback and information about
          the path in cleartext to sending endpoints, under sending endpoint 
          control

        allow devices on path to provide information about the path in cleartext 
          to receiving endpoints, with feedback to the sending endpoint, under
          sending endpoint control

        Note that this approach explicitly gives the control of information
        exposure back the application and/or transport layer protocol on
        the end host. It is the goal of PLUS to minimize the information
        exposed at the level of detail that is useful for the network,
        while encrypting everything else. This is important to avoid future
        implicit treatment and the resulting ossification, as well as to
        leverage the principle of least exposure to minimize privacy risks
        presented by explicit cooperation.

        Given that the primary goal of PLUS is to enable the deployment of arbitrary
        transport protocols, encrypting transport protocol headers, we assume that
        the higher-layer protocol can provide an encryption context that can be used by
        PLUS to provide authentication, integrity, and encryption where needed. The
        primary threat model to defend against will be modification or deletion of
        exposed information by middleboxes and other devices on path, by allowing a
        remote endpoint to detect modifications.

        The working group will start with an initial set of use cases (see
        draft-kuehlewind-spud-use-cases) and requirements (see
        draft-trammell-spud-req), taken from experience with the Substrate
        Protocol for User Datagrams (SPUD) prototype.
        The working group's main output will be an experimental protocol
        specification, together with an initial registry of types of
        information that can be exposed using PLUS, clearly aligned to
        these use cases and requirements. The working group will close if
        it is not able to come to consensus on a protocol design to meet
        these requirements.

        The working group will additionally aim to identify other working
        groups that could or should address parts of these requirements
        within existing protocols, e.g. by specifying new protocol
        extensions or as input for on-going standardization work. It will
        aim to work with working groups defining encryption protocols (e.g.
        TLS) which could be used for encryption of transport protocols
        running over PLUS.

   - Mailing List: https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/spud
   - Relevant drafts:
      - Requirements for the design of a Substrate Protocol for User Datagrams
      https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-trammell-spud-req-04
      - Use Cases for a Substrate Protocol for User Datagrams
      https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-kuehlewind-spud-use-cases-01
