Path Layer UDP Substrate (PLUS)
===============================

The PLUS working group's goal is to define a common shim layer atop the User
Datagram Protocol (UDP) to provide a transport-independent method to signal
flow semantics under transport and application control, necessary to enable
the deployment of new, encrypted transport protocols within the existing
Internet. UDP provides compatibility with currently deployed middleboxes as
well as ubiquitous support in endpoints, and supports userspace implementation
of new transport protocols. The working group will not specify any new
transport protocols.

The current Internet protocol stack does not provide explicit, in-band,
transport-independent signaling to on-path network devices. This has led to
the deployment of devices which perform implicit discovery of transport
semantics and traffic characteristics via inspection of protocol headers and
payload, a practice made possible when these are sent in the clear.

The most important of these signals concerns flow lifetime and association of
a uniflow with its reverse counterpart, by which firewalls and other stateful
middleboxes assume endpoint consent to communicate. We assume that future
transport protocols will have confidentiality-protected headers, both to
protect their own operation as well as to prevent future ossification due to
implicit use of their internals by device on path. 

Other signals currently exposed in cleartext transport headers include
information for implicit passive performance measurement, such as loss and
round-trip-time calculation, as provided in TCP by the sequence and
acknowledgment numbers and the timestamp option. 

This signaling should be transport protocol independent, to allow on-path
devices using it to be adapted once for a variety of future transport
protocols. While IP would seem to be the natural home for this facility, both
IPv4 and IPv6 options and extensions have deployment problems on their own,
which makes it hard to include any additional information in these protocols.

The PLUS working group will specify a new protocol as a Path Layer UDP
Substrate (PLUS), to support experimental deployment of explicit cooperation
between endpoints and devices on path, with the following initial goal:

- enable ubiquitous deployment of encrypted higher layer protocols
  by providing exposure of basic TCP-like semantics (e.g. SYN, FIN, 
  RST flags) to devices on path (e.g. NATs and firewalls).

The protocol may be extensible to:

- allow applications and transport protocols to explicitly provide
  limited information with integrity protection to devices on path

- allow devices on path to provide unencrypted feedback and information 
  about the path directly to sending endpoints, under sending endpoint
  control

- allow devices on path to provide unencrypted information about the 
  path to receiving endpoints, with encrypted feedback to the 
  sending endpoint, under sending endpoint control

This approach explicitly gives the control of information exposure back the
application and/or transport layer protocol on the end host. It is the goal of
PLUS to minimize the information exposed, to make information exposure
transparent, and to limit the level of detail to that useful for network
treatment, while encrypting everything else. Endpoint verification of
signaling integrity, careful design of minimal data structures, and
restrictive policies for registration of signals can help to meet this goal.
This is important to avoid future implicit treatment and resulting
ossification, as well as to minimize the privacy risks presented by explicit
signaling.

We assume that the higher-layer protocol can provide an encryption context
that can be used by PLUS to provide authentication, integrity, and encryption
where needed. The primary threat model to defend against will be modification
or deletion of exposed information by middleboxes and other devices on path,
by allowing a remote endpoint to detect modifications.

The working group's main output will be an experimental protocol
specification, together with an registry of types of information that can be
exposed using PLUS. 

The working group will start from a set of abstract mechanisms for transport-
independent state exposure (draft-trammell-plus-statefulness) and for the
general two-way signaling of information about traffic flows 
(draft-trammell-plus-abstract-mech), on the background of requirements derived 
from the Session Protocol for UDP Datagrams (SPUD) effort. The focus in the 
first iteration of the charter will  be on an extremely limited vocabulary of
signals to replace performance  measurement information in TCP in a transport-
independent way. Additional signals to be exposed are a matter of ongoing
work. The working group will accept experiment and implementation reports for
these signals, to evaluate the progress of the experiment.

This PLUS protocol specification will consider potential attacks against
the protocol, both arising from the encapsulation chosen as well as new
attacks made possible by the protocol, and propose mitigations for these
attacks.

The working group will additionally aim to identify and work with other
working groups that could address its goals within existing
protocols, e.g. by specifying new protocol extensions, or as input for on-
going standardization work. It will aim to work with working groups defining
encryption protocols (e.g. DTLS) which could be used for encryption of
transport protocols running over PLUS. It will aim to work with working groups
defining transport protocols (e.g. QUIC) whose development efforts could act as
sources of requirements for PLUS.

Out of scope for the working group are:

- The design and specification of new transport protocols running over PLUS
- Mechanisms for signaling among multiple devices on path between two endpoints
- Mechanisms for key exchange or cryptographic context establishment between endpoints and devices on path

Initial milestones:

- Chartering + 9 mo: Submit an Experimental protocol specification for the PLUS protocol to the IESG, with a focus on state establishment and passive measurement as initial applications of the protocol.
- Chartering + 15 mo: Submit initial contents of registry of signals to be exposed using PLUS to the IESG
